APM Server Documentation (#1363)
elastic/cloud-on-k8s: docs/apm.asciidoc

> [id="{p}-apm-server"]

Reviewer: It might be helpful to add a table of contents here for all of the sub-sections

== APM Server

This section describes how to deploy, configure and access an APM Server with ECK.

> NOTE: The current Docker image of the APM Server needs to be run as `root` or with the user id 1000. This prevents to run the APM Server on some environments like Openshift or on any Kubernetes cluster that would set a different user in the security context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: The current Docker image of the APM Server must run as `root` or with the user id 1000. This prevents the APM Server from running in some environments such as Openshift, or on any Kubernetes cluster that would set a different user in the security context.
```

+
. Monitor APM server deployment
+
You can retrieve details about the APM server instance:
+
[source,sh]
----
kubectl get apmservers
----
+
[source,sh]
----
NAME                    HEALTH   NODES   VERSION   AGE
apm-server-quickstart   green    1       7.2.0     8m
----
And you can list all the Pods belonging to a given deployment:
+
[source,sh]
----
kubectl get pods --selector='apm.k8s.elastic.co/name=apm-server-quickstart'
----
+
[source,sh]
----
NAME                                                READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
apm-server-quickstart-apm-server-69b447ddc5-fflc6   1/1     Running   0          2m50s
----

=== Advanced configuration

==== Customize the APM server configuration

You can customize the configuration of the APM server using a `config` element in the specification:

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: apm.k8s.elastic.co/v1alpha1
kind: ApmServer
metadata:
  name: apm-server-quickstart
  namespace: default
spec:
  version: "7.2.0"
  nodeCount: 1
  config:
    output:
      elasticsearch:
        headers:
          X-My-Header: Just an example of a custom settings
  elasticsearchRef:
    name: quickstart
----

> Note that the configuration items you provide always overrides the ones that are generated by the operator.

Reviewer 2: s/overrides/override/

==== APM Secrets keystore for secure settings

The APM Server keystore can be used to store sensitive settings in the APM server configuration. ECK can automatically manage the APM Server keystore in the Pods.

. First create a secret with the secret settings:
+
[source,yaml]
----
kubectl create secret generic apm-secret-settings --from-literal=ES_PASSWORD=asecretpassword
----

. In the specification of the APM server add a reference to the previously created secret within a `spec.secureSettings` section. Then reference the key in the APM server configuration as it is described in the https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/apm/server/current/keystore.html[following documentation].
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: apm.k8s.elastic.co/v1alpha1
kind: ApmServer
metadata:
  name: apm-server-quickstart
  namespace: default
spec:
  version: "7.2.0"
  nodeCount: 1
  secureSettings:
    secretName: apm-secret-settings
  config:
    output:
      elasticsearch:
        password: "${ES_PASSWORD}"
----

==== Reference an already existing Elasticsearch cluster

> Now that we know how to use the APM keystore and customize the server configuration let see how to manually configure a secured connection to an already existing Elasticsearch cluster:

Reviewer 2: s/let/let's/

> Now that we know how to use the APM keystore and customize the server configuration let's see how to manually configure a secured connection to an already existing Elasticsearch cluster:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we know how to use the APM keystore and customize the server configuration, let's see how to manually configure a secured connection to an existing Elasticsearch cluster:
```

. Create a secret with the Elasticsearch CA
+
First we need to store the certificate authority of the Elasticsearch cluster in a secret:
+
[source,yaml]
----
kubectl create secret generic es-ca --from-file=tls.crt=elasticsearch-ca.crt
----

> In the above command the file `elasticsearch-ca.crt` must contain the CA certificate of the Elasticsearch cluster you want to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: the file `elasticsearch-ca.crt` must contain the CA certificate of the Elasticsearch cluster you want to use with the APM server.
```

+

> . You can then mount this secret using the pod template and reference the file in the `config` of the APM Server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. You can then mount this secret using the pod template, and reference the file in the `config` of the APM Server.
```

+

> Here is a complete example with a password stored in the Keystore as it is described in the previous section:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a complete example with a password stored in the Keystore as described in the previous section:
```

        username: elastic
        password: "${ES_PASSWORD}"
        protocol: "https"
        ssl.certificate_authorities: ["/usr/share/apm-server/config/elasticsearch-ca/tls.crt"]
  podTemplate:
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: apm-server
        volumeMounts:
        - mountPath: /usr/share/apm-server/config/elasticsearch-ca
          name: elasticsearch-ca
          readOnly: true
      volumes:
      - name: elasticsearch-ca
        secret:
          defaultMode: 420
          optional: false
          secretName: es-ca # This is the secret that holds the Elasticsearch CA cert
----

==== TLS Certificates

By default the operator manages a private CA and generates a self-signed certificate used to secure the communication between APM agents and the server.

This behavior and the relevant configuration is identical to what is done for Elasticsearch and Kibana. You can refer to link:k8s-accessing-elastic-services.html#k8s-setting-up-your-own-certificate[this documentation] to understand how to use your own certificate to configure the TLS endpoint of the APM server.

=== Connecting to the APM server

==== APM Server service

> The APM server is exposed with a Service, you can refer to link:k8s-accessing-elastic-services.html[this documentation] to understand how to access it.

Reviewer 2: As @thbkrkr pointed out recently I believe the official spelling is "APM Server" with captital s

> The APM Server is exposed with a Service, you can refer to link:k8s-accessing-elastic-services.html[this documentation] to understand how to access it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The APM Server is exposed with a Service. You can refer to link:k8s-accessing-elastic-services.html[this documentation] for information on accessing it.
```

You can retrieve the list of all the APM Services with following command:

[source,sh]
----
kubectl get service --selector='common.k8s.elastic.co/type=apm-server'
----

[source,sh]
----
NAME                             TYPE        CLUSTER-IP   EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)    AGE
apm-server-quickstart-apm-http   ClusterIP   10.0.1.252   <none>        8200/TCP   154m
----

==== APM Server secret token

> The operator generates an authorization token that the agents must send to authenticate themselves to the APM Server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The operator generates an authorization token that agents must send to authenticate themselves to the APM Server.
```

> This token is stored in a secret and can be retrieved with the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This token is stored in a secret named `{APM-server-name}-apm-token` and can be retrieved with the following command:
```

[source,sh]
----

> kubectl get secret/apm-server-quickstart-apm-token  -o json | jq -r '.data| .["secret-token"]' | base64 -D

Reviewer 2: Use go-template instead to avoid reliance on external tools?
``
kubectl get secret/apm-server-quickstart-apm-token  -o go-template='{{index .data "secret-token" | base64decode}}'
```

[id="{p}-apm-server"]
== APM Server

This section describes how to deploy, configure and access an APM Server with ECK.

* <<{p}-apm-eck-managed-es,Use an Elasticsearch cluster managed by ECK>>
* <<{p}-apm-advanced-configuration,Advanced configuration>>
** <<{p}-apm-customize-configuration,Customize the APM Server configuration>>
** <<{p}-apm-secure-settings,APM Secrets keystore for secure settings>>
** <<{p}-apm-existing-es,Reference an existing Elasticsearch cluster>>
** <<{p}-apm-tls,TLS Certificates>>
* <<{p}-apm-connecting,Connecting to the APM Server>>
** <<{p}-apm-service,APM Server service>>
** <<{p}-apm-secret-token,APM Server secret token>>

NOTE: The current Docker image of the APM Server must run as `root` or with the user id 1000. This prevents the APM Server from running in some environments such as OpenShift, or on any Kubernetes cluster that would set a different user in the security context.

[float]
[id="{p}-apm-eck-managed-es"]
=== Use an Elasticsearch cluster managed by ECK

> When both the APM Server and Elasticsearch are managed by ECK it allows a smooth and secured integration between the two. The output configuration of the APM Server is setup automatically to establish a trust relationship with Elasticsearch.

Reviewer 3: Possible rewording:

> When both the APM Server and Elasticsearch are managed by ECK, a smooth and secured integration occurs between the two.

> . If you want to deploy an APM Server and connect it to the cluster `quickstart` created in the link:k8s-quickstart.html[quickstart] then apply the following specification:

Reviewer 3: To deploy an APM Server and connect it to the cluster `quickstart` created in the link:k8s-quickstart.html[quickstart], apply the following specification:

+
[source,yaml]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: apm.k8s.elastic.co/v1alpha1
kind: ApmServer
metadata:
  name: apm-server-quickstart
  namespace: default
spec:
  version: "7.2.0"
  nodeCount: 1
  elasticsearchRef:
    name: quickstart
EOF
----
+
NOTE: Deploying the APM Server and Elasticsearch in two different namespaces is not supported for the moment.

> +

Reviewer 3: is currently not supported

[float]
[id="{p}-apm-secure-settings"]
==== APM Secrets keystore for secure settings

The APM Server keystore can be used to store sensitive settings in the APM Server configuration. ECK can automatically manage the APM Server keystore in the Pods.

. First create a secret with the secret settings:
+
[source,yaml]
----
kubectl create secret generic apm-secret-settings --from-literal=ES_PASSWORD=asecretpassword
----

. In the specification of the APM Server add a reference to the previously created secret within a `spec.secureSettings` section. Then reference the key in the APM Server configuration as it is described in the https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/apm/server/current/keystore.html[following documentation].
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: apm.k8s.elastic.co/v1alpha1
kind: ApmServer
metadata:
  name: apm-server-quickstart
  namespace: default
spec:
  version: "7.2.0"
  nodeCount: 1
  secureSettings:
    secretName: apm-secret-settings
  config:
    output:
      elasticsearch:
        password: "${ES_PASSWORD}"
----

[float]
[id="{p}-apm-existing-es"]
==== Reference an existing Elasticsearch cluster

> Now that we know how to use the APM keystore and customize the server configuration, let's see how to manually configure a secured connection to an existing Elasticsearch cluster.

Reviewer 3: Now that you know ...., you can manually configure....

. Create a secret with the Elasticsearch CA
+

> First we need to store the certificate authority of the Elasticsearch cluster in a secret:

Reviewer 3: First, you need to store...

+
[source,yaml]
----
kubectl create secret generic es-ca --from-file=tls.crt=elasticsearch-ca.crt
----
+
Note: the file `elasticsearch-ca.crt` must contain the CA certificate of the Elasticsearch cluster you want to use with the APM server.

> . You can then mount this secret using the pod template, and reference the file in the `config` of the APM Server.

Reviewer 3: I guess "Pod" is capitalised. Can you confirm?

+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: apm.k8s.elastic.co/v1alpha1
kind: ApmServer
metadata:
  name: apm-server-quickstart
  namespace: default
spec:
  version: "7.2.0"
  nodeCount: 1
  secureSettings:
    secretName: apm-secret-settings
  config:
    output:
      elasticsearch:
        hosts: ["my-own-elasticsearch-cluster:9200"]
        username: elastic
        password: "${ES_PASSWORD}"
        protocol: "https"
        ssl.certificate_authorities: ["/usr/share/apm-server/config/elasticsearch-ca/tls.crt"]
  podTemplate:
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: apm-server
        volumeMounts:
        - mountPath: /usr/share/apm-server/config/elasticsearch-ca
          name: elasticsearch-ca
          readOnly: true
      volumes:
      - name: elasticsearch-ca
        secret:
          defaultMode: 420
          optional: false
          secretName: es-ca # This is the secret that holds the Elasticsearch CA cert
----

[float]
[id="{p}-apm-tls"]
==== TLS Certificates

By default the operator manages a private CA and generates a self-signed certificate used to secure the communication between APM agents and the server.

> This behavior and the relevant configuration is identical to what is done for Elasticsearch and Kibana. You can refer to link:k8s-accessing-elastic-services.html#k8s-setting-up-your-own-certificate[this documentation] to understand how to use your own certificate to configure the TLS endpoint of the APM Server.

Reviewer 3: Descriptive links are more useful than just "see this documentation". 
Possible rewording:

> See link:k8s-accessing-elastic-services.html#k8s-setting-up-your-own-certificate[Setting up your own certificate] for more information on how to use your own certificate to configure the TLS endpoint of the APM Server.

You can refer to the https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/apm/agent/index.html[APM agents documentation] for further details about how to configure them to work with custom certificates.

> 

Reviewer 3: For more details on how to configure them to work with custom certificates, see the https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/apm/agent/index.html[APM agents documentation].

[float]
[id="{p}-apm-connecting"]
=== Connecting to the APM Server
[float]
[id="{p}-apm-service"]
==== APM Server service

The APM Server is exposed with a Service. You can refer to link:k8s-accessing-elastic-services.html[this documentation] for information on accessing it.

> 

Reviewer 3: Same comment as above about descriptive links.

> For information on accessing it, see link:k8s-accessing-elastic-services.html[How to access Elastic Stack services].

> You can retrieve the list of all the APM Services with following command:

Reviewer 3: To retrieve the list of all the APM Services, use the following command:

[source,sh]
----
kubectl get service --selector='common.k8s.elastic.co/type=apm-server'
----

[source,sh]
----
NAME                             TYPE        CLUSTER-IP   EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)    AGE
apm-server-quickstart-apm-http   ClusterIP   10.0.1.252   <none>        8200/TCP   154m
----
[float]
[id="{p}-apm-secret-token"]
==== APM Server secret token

The operator generates an authorization token that agents must send to authenticate themselves to the APM Server.

This token is stored in a secret named `{APM-server-name}-apm-token` and can be retrieved with the following command:

[source,sh]
----
kubectl get secret/apm-server-quickstart-apm-token  -o go-template='{{index .data "secret-token" | base64decode}}'
----

> For any additional information about the APM Server please refer to https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/apm/server/current/index.html[this documentation].

Reviewer 3: For more information about the APM Server, see https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/apm/server/current/index.html[APM Server Reference].

By default the operator manages a private CA and generates a self-signed certificate used to secure the communication between APM agents and the server.

> This behavior and the relevant configuration is identical to what is done for Elasticsearch and Kibana. You can refer to link:k8s-accessing-elastic-services.html#k8s-setting-up-your-own-certificate[this documentation] to understand how to use your own certificate to configure the TLS endpoint of the APM Server.

Reviewer 4: In a default setup APM Agents connect to the APM Server, rather than users sending custom requests. Since agents need configuration to work with custom certificates, I suggest to also add a note pointing this out, and linking to the [agents overview doc](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/apm/agent/index.html). Users can take it from there and dive into whichever language they use and find specific documentation e.g. [#config-server-cert](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/apm/agent/python/current/configuration.html#config-server-cert)
